.TH UNHINGED-TRANSCRIPTION 3 "December 2025" "Unhinged 1.0" "Library Functions"
.SH NAME
unhinged-transcription \- Speech-to-text transcription using Whisper
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B from libs.python.clients import TranscriptionService
.PP
.BI "service = TranscriptionService(model_size=" tiny "|" base "|" small "|" medium "|" large ")"
.PP
.BI "text = service.transcribe_audio(" audio_path ")"
.br
.BI "text = service.transcribe_audio_data(" audio_bytes ", format=" wav ")"
.br
.BI "result = service.transcribe_with_metadata(" audio_path ")"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B TranscriptionService
provides speech-to-text transcription using OpenAI's Whisper model.
It runs locally with no network calls \- audio never leaves your machine.
.PP
The model is loaded lazily on first use, so initialization is fast.
.SH METHODS
.TP
.BI "transcribe_audio(" audio_path ")"
Transcribe an audio file to text. Accepts WAV, MP3, and other common formats.
Returns the transcribed text as a string.
.TP
.BI "transcribe_audio_data(" audio_bytes ", format=" wav ")"
Transcribe raw audio bytes. The data is written to a temporary file,
transcribed, then cleaned up. Returns the transcribed text.
.TP
.BI "transcribe_with_metadata(" audio_path ")"
Transcribe audio and return detailed metadata including detected language,
word-level segments, and duration estimate.
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.B model_size
Whisper model size. Larger models are more accurate but slower:
.RS
.TP
.B tiny
Fastest, lowest accuracy (~1GB VRAM)
.TP
.B base
Good balance for most use cases (~1GB VRAM)
.TP
.B small
Better accuracy (~2GB VRAM)
.TP
.B medium
High accuracy (~5GB VRAM)
.TP
.B large
Highest accuracy (~10GB VRAM)
.RE
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.B transcribe_audio(), transcribe_audio_data()
Returns a string containing the transcribed text.
.TP
.B transcribe_with_metadata()
Returns a dictionary with keys:
.RS
.TP
.B text
The transcribed text (string)
.TP
.B language
Detected language code (string)
.TP
.B segments
List of word-level timing segments
.TP
.B duration
Estimated audio duration in seconds
.RE
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B FileNotFoundError
Raised if the audio file does not exist.
.TP
.B RuntimeError
Raised if transcription fails or the model fails to load.
.TP
.B ImportError
Raised if the whisper package is not installed.
.SH EXAMPLES
Basic transcription:
.PP
.RS
.nf
from libs.python.clients import TranscriptionService

service = TranscriptionService(model_size="base")
text = service.transcribe_audio("recording.wav")
print(text)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Transcription with metadata:
.PP
.RS
.nf
result = service.transcribe_with_metadata("speech.mp3")
print(f"Language: {result['language']}")
print(f"Text: {result['text']}")
.fi
.RE
.SH DEPENDENCIES
Requires the
.B openai-whisper
package:
.PP
.RS
pip install openai-whisper
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR unhinged (1),
.BR unhinged-transcribe (1),
.BR unhinged-text-generation (3),
.BR unhinged-architecture (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Unhinged Development Team

