.TH UNHINGED-ARCHITECTURE 7 "December 2025" "Unhinged 1.0" "Miscellaneous"
.SH NAME
unhinged-architecture \- Unhinged system architecture and design philosophy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Unhinged is a CLI-first native graphics platform with a local-first,
privacy-preserving architecture. It provides headless content generation
(text, images, audio) and system automation through executable graph workflows.
.SH DESIGN PHILOSOPHY
.TP
.B CLI-First
All functionality is accessible via the
.B unhinged
command. The CLI is the primary interface, not a wrapper around a GUI.
.TP
.B Local-First
Models run locally via Ollama and Whisper. Your data never leaves your machine
unless you explicitly configure cloud providers.
.TP
.B Direct Model Access
No gRPC, no microservices, no network hops. Python clients call models directly
for minimal latency and maximum reliability.
.TP
.B UNIX Philosophy
Small, composable tools. Graphs pipe data between nodes using stdout/stdin
semantics familiar to shell users.
.SH COMPONENTS
.SS CLI Layer
The
.B unhinged
command provides subcommands for all operations:
.PP
.RS
unhinged generate text "prompt"
.br
unhinged transcribe mic
.br
unhinged graph session
.RE
.SS Clients
Python wrappers for direct model access in
.BR libs/python/clients/ :
.TP
.B TranscriptionService
Whisper speech-to-text. See
.BR unhinged-transcription (3).
.TP
.B TextGenerationService
LLM text generation. See
.BR unhinged-text-generation (3).
.TP
.B ImageGenerationService
Stable Diffusion image generation.
.TP
.B TTSService
Text-to-speech synthesis.
.SS Drivers
Higher-level adapters in
.B libs/python/drivers/
that implement a common
.B Driver
interface for graph execution. Drivers wrap clients and provide
consistent input/output contracts.
.SS Graphs
Executable DAG workflows defined in JSON. Nodes represent operations
(shell commands, LLM queries, user prompts) and edges define data flow.
See
.BR unhinged-graph (5).
.SH EXECUTION MODEL
.SS Graph Execution
Graphs execute as DAGs with automatic parallelization:
.IP 1. 4
Nodes with no dependencies execute first (in parallel if multiple).
.IP 2. 4
Node outputs route to downstream nodes via
.B stdout
piping.
.IP 3. 4
Conditional edges evaluate Python expressions to determine flow.
.IP 4. 4
Execution continues until all reachable nodes complete.
.SS Node Types
.TP
.B UnixCommandNode
Execute shell commands with timeout.
.TP
.B UserInputNode
Prompt user for confirmation or selection.
.TP
.B SubgraphNode
Execute nested graphs.
.TP
.B RubricGradeNode
Quality gate with pass/fail scoring.
.SH DIRECTORY STRUCTURE
.TP
.B cli/
Click-based CLI commands.
.TP
.B libs/python/clients/
Direct model access wrappers.
.TP
.B libs/python/drivers/
Driver-interface adapters for graphs.
.TP
.B libs/python/graph/
Graph execution engine.
.TP
.B libs/python/persistence/
Document store for graphs and sessions.
.TP
.B man/
Manual pages (you are here).
.SH INFRASTRUCTURE
.TP
.B Ollama
Local LLM server on port 1500. Runs models like Llama, Mistral, CodeLlama.
.TP
.B Whisper
OpenAI's speech recognition, loaded directly via Python.
.TP
.B PostgreSQL
Optional persistence for sessions and documents.
.TP
.B Redis
Optional caching layer.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR unhinged (1),
.BR unhinged-transcription (3),
.BR unhinged-text-generation (3),
.BR unhinged-graph (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Unhinged Development Team

