.TH UNHINGED 1 "November 2025" "Unhinged 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
unhinged \- Native Graphics Platform with Dual-System Architecture
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B unhinged
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Unhinged is a native graphics platform with dual-system architecture, providing
headless content generation (text, images, audio) and system management capabilities.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B generate
Generate content: text, images, audio.
.br
See \fBunhinged-generate\fR(1) for details.
.TP
.B transcribe
Transcribe audio: speech-to-text conversion.
.br
See \fBunhinged-transcribe\fR(1) for details.
.TP
.B image
Generate images from text prompts.
.br
See \fBunhinged-image\fR(1) for details.
.TP
.B voice
Generate voice/audio from text.
.br
See \fBunhinged-voice\fR(1) for details.
.TP
.B system
System commands for Unhinged dual-system architecture.
.TP
.B admin
Admin and debug commands.
.TP
.B vm
Virtual machine commands.
.TP
.B dev
Development commands: build, test, lint, static-analysis.
.TP
.B graph
Manage graph workflows: create, list, get, update, delete.
.br
See \fBunhinged-graph\fR(1) for details.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Generate text from a prompt:
.B unhinged generate text "write a haiku about the moon"
.TP
Transcribe audio file:
.B unhinged transcribe audio speech.wav
.TP
Generate an image:
.B unhinged image generate "a sunset over mountains"
.TP
Generate voice audio:
.B unhinged voice generate "hello world"
.TP
Create a graph workflow:
.B unhinged graph create workflow.py --name "My Workflow" --tags automation
.TP
List all graphs:
.B unhinged graph list
.SH SEE ALSO
.SS Commands
.BR unhinged-generate (1),
.BR unhinged-transcribe (1),
.BR unhinged-image (1),
.BR unhinged-voice (1),
.BR unhinged-graph (1)
.SS Library APIs
.BR unhinged-transcription (3),
.BR unhinged-text-generation (3)
.SS File Formats
.BR unhinged-graph (5)
.SS Concepts
.BR unhinged-architecture (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Unhinged Development Team
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project repository.

